Coverage Indications, Limitations, and/or Medical Necessity
For any item to be covered by Medicare, it must 1) be eligible for a defined Medicare benefit category,
2) be reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury or to improve the
functioning of a malformed body member, and 3) meet all other applicable Medicare statutory and
regulatory requirements.
The purpose of a Local Coverage Determination (LCD) is to provide information regarding "reasonable
and necessary" criteria based on Social Security Act § 1862(a)(1)(A) provisions.
In addition to the "reasonable and necessary" criteria contained in this LCD there are other payment
rules, which are discussed in the following documents, that must also be met prior to Medicare
reimbursement:
The LCD-related Standard Documentation Requirements Article, located at the bottom of this
policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section.
The LCD-related Policy Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local
Coverage Documents section.
Refer to the Supplier Manual for additional information on documentation requirements.
Refer to the DME MAC web sites for additional bulletin articles and other publications related to
this LCD.
For the items addressed in this LCD, the "reasonable and necessary" criteria, based on Social Security
Act § 1862(a)(1)(A) provisions, are defined by the following coverage indications, limitations and/or
medical necessity.
HOME BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORS (BGM)
To be eligible for coverage of home blood glucose monitors and related accessories and supplies, the
beneficiary must meet both of the following basic criteria (1) - (2):
1. The beneficiary has diabetes (Refer to the ICD-10 code list in the LCD-related Policy Article for
applicable diagnoses); and
2. The beneficiary's treating practitioner has concluded that the beneficiary (or the beneficiary's
caregiver) has sufficient training using the particular device prescribed as evidenced by providing
a prescription for the appropriate supplies and frequency of blood glucose testing.
For all glucose monitors and related accessories and supplies, if the basic coverage criteria (1)-(2) are
not met, the item(s) will be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
Home blood glucose monitors with special features (HCPCS codes E2100, E2101) are covered when
the basic coverage criteria (1)-(2) are met and the treating practitioner certifies that the beneficiary
has a severe visual impairment (i.e., best corrected visual acuity of 20/200 or worse in both eyes)
requiring use of this special monitoring system.
Code E2101 is also covered for those with impairment of manual dexterity when the basic coverage
criteria (1)-(2) are met and the treating practitioner certifies that the beneficiary has an impairment of
manual dexterity severe enough to require the use of this special monitoring system. Coverage of code
E2101 for beneficiaries with manual dexterity impairments is not dependent upon a visual impairment.
If a glucose monitor (code E2100 or E2101) is provided and basic coverage criteria (1)-(2) plus the
additional criteria stated above are not met, it will be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
Lancets (code A4259), blood glucose test reagent strips (code A4253), glucose control solutions (code
A4256) and spring powered devices for lancets (code A4258) are covered for beneficiaries for whom
the glucose monitor is covered.
More than one spring powered device (code A4258) per 6 months is not reasonable and necessary.
The medical necessity for a laser skin piercing device (code E0620) and related lens shield cartridge
(code A4257) has not been established; therefore, claims for code E0620 and/or code A4257 will be
denied as not reasonable and necessary.
The quantity of test strips (code A4253) and lancets (code A4259) that are covered depends on the
usual medical needs of the beneficiary and whether or not the beneficiary is being treated with insulin,
regardless of their diagnostic classification as having Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes mellitus. Coverage of
testing supplies is based on the following guidelines:
Usual Utilization
For a beneficiary who is not currently being treated with insulin administrations, up to 100 test strips
and up to 100 lancets every 3 months are covered if the basic coverage criteria (1)-(2) (above) are met.
For a beneficiary who is currently being treated with insulin administrations, up to 300 test strips and
up to 300 lancets every 3 months are covered if basic coverage criteria (1)-(2) (above) are met.
High Utilization
For a beneficiary who is not currently being treated with insulin administrations, more than 100 test
strips and more than 100 lancets every 3 months are covered if criteria (a) - (c) below are met.
For a beneficiary who is currently being treated with insulin administrations, more than 300 test strips
and more than 300 lancets every 3 months are covered if criteria (a) - (c) below are met.
a. Basic coverage criteria (1)-(2) listed above for all home glucose monitors and related accessories
and supplies are met; and,
b. Within the six (6) months prior to ordering quantities of strips and lancets that exceed the
utilization guidelines, the treating practitioner has had an in-person visit with the beneficiary to
evaluate their diabetes control and their need for the specific quantity of supplies that exceeds the
usual utilization amounts described above; and,
c. Every six (6) months, for continued dispensing of quantities of testing supplies that exceed the
usual utilization amounts, the treating practitioner must verify adherence to the high utilization
testing regimen.
If neither basic coverage criterion (1) or (2) is met, all testing supplies will be denied as not reasonable
and necessary. If quantities of test strips or lancets that exceed the utilization guidelines are provided
and criteria (a) - (c) are not met, the amount in excess will be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MONITORS (CGM)
CGM devices covered by Medicare under the DME benefit are defined in CMS Ruling 1682R as
therapeutic CGMs. Refer to the Non-Medical Necessity Coverage and Payment Rules in the LCD-
related Policy Article for additional information.
Therapeutic CGMs and related supplies are covered by Medicare when all of the following coverage
criteria (1-5) are met:
1. The beneficiary has diabetes mellitus (Refer to the ICD-10 code list in the LCD-related Policy
Article for applicable diagnoses); and,
2. The beneficiary is insulin-treated with multiple (three or more) daily administrations of insulin or a
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) pump; and,
3. The beneficiary's insulin treatment regimen requires frequent adjustment by the beneficiary on the
basis of BGM or CGM testing results; and,
4. Within six (6) months prior to ordering the CGM, the treating practitioner has an in-person visit
with the beneficiary to evaluate their diabetes control and determined that criteria (1-3) above are
met; and,
5. Every six (6) months following the initial prescription of the CGM, the treating practitioner has an
in-person visit with the beneficiary to assess adherence to their CGM regimen and diabetes
treatment plan.
When a therapeutic CGM (code K0554) is covered, the related supply allowance (code K0553) is also
covered.
If any of coverage criteria (1-5) are not met, the CGM and related supply allowance will be denied as
not reasonable and necessary.
The supply allowance (code K0553) is billed as 1 Unit of Service (UOS) per thirty (30) days. Only one
(1) UOS of code K0553 may be billed to the DME MACs at a time. Billing more than 1 UOS per 30
days of code K0553 will be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
Therapeutic CGM devices replace a standard home blood glucose monitor (HCPCS codes E0607,
E2100, E2101) and related supplies (HCPCS codes A4233, A4234, A4235, A4236, A4244, A4245,
A4246, A4247, A4250, A4253, A4255, A4256, A4257, A4258, A4259). Claims for a BGM and related
supplies, billed in addition to an approved CGM device (code K0554) and associated supply allowance
(code K0553), will be denied. Refer to the Coding Guidelines in the LCD-related Policy Article for
additional information.
All therapeutic CGM devices billed to Medicare using HCPCS code K0554 must be reviewed for correct
coding by the Pricing, Data Analysis and Coding (PDAC) contractor. Continuous Glucose Monitor
systems that are billed using HCPCS code K0554, but that are not listed on the Product Classification
List for HCPCS code K0554, will be denied as incorrect coding. Refer to the Coding Guidelines in the
LCD-related Policy Article for additional information.
GENERAL
A Standard Written Order (SWO) must be communicated to the supplier before a claim is submitted. If
the supplier bills for an item addressed in this policy without first receiving a completed SWO, the
claim shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
For Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetics, Orthotics and Supplies (DMEPOS) base items that require
a Written Order Prior to Delivery (WOPD), the supplier must have received a signed SWO before the
DMEPOS item is delivered to a beneficiary. If a supplier delivers a DMEPOS item without first receiving
a WOPD, the claim shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Refer to the LCD-related Policy
Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section.
For DMEPOS base items that require a WOPD, and also require separately billed associated options,
accessories, and/or supplies, the supplier must have received a WOPD which lists the base item and
which may list all the associated options, accessories, and/or supplies that are separately billed prior
to the delivery of the items. In this scenario, if the supplier separately bills for associated options,
accessories, and/or supplies without first receiving a completed and signed WOPD of the base item
prior to delivery, the claim(s) shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
An item/service is correctly coded when it meets all the coding guidelines listed in CMS HCPCS
guidelines, LCDs, LCD-related Policy Articles, or DME MAC articles. Claims that do not meet coding
guidelines shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary/incorrectly coded.
Proof of delivery (POD) is a Supplier Standard and DMEPOS suppliers are required to maintain POD
documentation in their files. Proof of delivery documentation must be made available to the Medicare
contractor upon request. All services that do not have appropriate proof of delivery from the supplier
shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
REFILL REQUIREMENTS
For DMEPOS items and supplies provided on a recurring basis, billing must be based on prospective,
not retrospective use. For DMEPOS products that are supplied as refills to the original order, suppliers
must contact the beneficiary prior to dispensing the refill and not automatically ship on a pre-
determined basis, even if authorized by the beneficiary. This shall be done to ensure that the refilled
item remains reasonable and necessary, existing supplies are approaching exhaustion, and to confirm
any changes or modifications to the order. Contact with the beneficiary or designee regarding refills
must take place no sooner than 14 calendar days prior to the delivery/shipping date. For delivery of
refills, the supplier must deliver the DMEPOS product no sooner than 10 calendar days prior to the end
of usage for the current product. This is regardless of which delivery method is utilized.
For all DMEPOS items that are provided on a recurring basis, suppliers are required to have contact
with the beneficiary or caregiver/designee prior to dispensing a new supply of items. Suppliers must
not deliver refills without a refill request from a beneficiary. Items delivered without a valid,
documented refill request will be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
Suppliers must not dispense a quantity of supplies exceeding a beneficiary's expected utilization.
Suppliers must stay attuned to changed or atypical utilization patterns on the part of their clients.
Suppliers must verify with the treating practitioner that any changed or atypical utilization is
warranted.
Regardless of utilization, a supplier must not dispense more than a three (3) - month quantity of BGM
testing supplies at a time.
Refill requirements do not apply to code K0553. Only one (1) unit of service of code K0553 may be
billed to the DME MACs at a time. Refer to the Coding Guidelines in the LCD-related Policy Article for
additional billing instructions.