Coverage Indications, Limitations, and/or Medical Necessity
For any item to be covered by Medicare, it must 1) be eligible for a defined Medicare benefit
category, 2) be reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury or to
improve the functioning of a malformed body member, and 3) meet all other applicable
Medicare statutory and regulatory requirements.
The purpose of a Local Coverage Determination (LCD) is to provide information regarding
"reasonable and necessary" criteria based on Social Security Act § 1862(a)(1)(A) provisions.
In addition to the "reasonable and necessary" criteria contained in this LCD there are other
payment rules, which are discussed in the following documents, that must also be met prior to
Medicare reimbursement:
The LCD-related Standard Documentation Requirements Article, located at the bottom of
this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section.
The LCD-related Policy Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local
Coverage Documents section.
Refer to the Supplier Manual for additional information on documentation requirements.
Refer to the DME MAC web sites for additional bulletin articles and other publications
related to this LCD.
For the items addressed in this LCD, the "reasonable and necessary" criteria, based on Social
Security Act § 1862(a)(1)(A) provisions, are defined by the following coverage indications,
limitations and/or medical necessity.
HOME BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORS (BGM)
To be eligible for coverage of home blood glucose monitors and related accessories and
supplies, the beneficiary must meet both of the following basic criteria (1)-(2):
1. The beneficiary has diabetes (Refer to the ICD-10 code list in the LCD-related Policy Article
for applicable diagnoses); and,
2. The beneficiary's treating practitioner has concluded that the beneficiary (or the
beneficiary's caregiver) has sufficient training using the particular device prescribed as
evidenced by providing a prescription for the appropriate supplies and frequency of blood
glucose testing.
For all glucose monitors and related accessories and supplies, if the basic coverage criteria (1)-
(2) are not met, the item(s) will be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
Home blood glucose monitors with special features (HCPCS codes E2100, E2101) are covered
when the basic coverage criteria (1)-(2) are met and the treating practitioner certifies that the
beneficiary has a severe visual impairment (i.e., best corrected visual acuity of 20/200 or worse
in both eyes) requiring use of this special monitoring system.
Code E2101 is also covered for those with impairment of manual dexterity when the basic
coverage criteria (1)-(2) are met and the treating practitioner certifies that the beneficiary has
an impairment of manual dexterity severe enough to require the use of this special monitoring
system. Coverage of code E2101 for beneficiaries with manual dexterity impairments is not
dependent upon a visual impairment.
If a glucose monitor (code E2100 or E2101) is provided and basic coverage criteria (1)-(2) plus
the additional criteria stated above are not met, it will be denied as not reasonable and
necessary.
Lancets (code A4259), blood glucose test reagent strips (code A4253), glucose control solutions
(code A4256) and spring powered devices for lancets (code A4258) are covered for
beneficiaries for whom the glucose monitor is covered.
More than one spring powered device (code A4258) per 6 months is not reasonable and
necessary.
The medical necessity for a laser skin piercing device (code E0620) and related lens shield
cartridge (code A4257) has not been established; therefore, claims for code E0620 and/or code
A4257 will be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
The quantity of test strips (code A4253) and lancets (code A4259) that are covered depends on
the usual medical needs of the beneficiary and whether or not the beneficiary is being treated
with insulin, regardless of their diagnostic classification as having Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Coverage of testing supplies is based on the following guidelines:
Usual Utilization
For a beneficiary who is not currently being treated with insulin administrations, up to 100 test
strips and up to 100 lancets every 3 months are covered if the basic coverage criteria (1)-(2)
(above) are met.
For a beneficiary who is currently being treated with insulin administrations, up to 300 test
strips and up to 300 lancets every 3 months are covered if basic coverage criteria (1)-(2)
(above) are met.
High Utilization
For a beneficiary who is not currently being treated with insulin administrations, more than 100
test strips and more than 100 lancets every 3 months are covered if criteria (a)-(c) below are
met.
For a beneficiary who is currently being treated with insulin administrations, more than 300 test
strips and more than 300 lancets every 3 months are covered if criteria (a)-(c) below are met.
a. Basic coverage criteria (1)-(2) listed above for all home glucose monitors and related
accessories and supplies are met; and,
b. Within the six (6) months prior to ordering quantities of strips and lancets that exceed the
utilization guidelines, the treating practitioner has had an in-person or Medicare-approved
telehealth visit with the beneficiary to evaluate their diabetes control and their need for the
specific quantity of supplies that exceeds the usual utilization amounts described above;
and,
c. Every six (6) months, for continued dispensing of quantities of testing supplies that exceed
the usual utilization amounts, the treating practitioner must verify adherence to the high
utilization testing regimen.
If neither basic coverage criterion (1) or (2) is met, all testing supplies will be denied as not
reasonable and necessary. If quantities of test strips or lancets that exceed the utilization
guidelines are provided and criteria (a)-(c) are not met, the amount in excess will be denied as
not reasonable and necessary.
CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MONITORS (CGMs)
A non-adjunctive CGM can be used to make treatment decisions without the need for a stand-
alone BGM to confirm testing results. An adjunctive CGM requires the user verify their glucose
levels or trends displayed on a CGM with a BGM prior to making treatment decisions. On
February 28, 2022, CMS determined that both non-adjunctive and adjunctive CGMs may be
classified as DME.
Refer to the NON-MEDICAL NECESSITY COVERAGE AND PAYMENT RULES and CODING
GUIDELINES sections in the LCD-related Policy Article for additional information regarding
classification of CGMs as DME.
To be eligible for coverage of a CGM and related supplies, the beneficiary must meet all of the
following initial coverage criteria (1)-(5):
1. The beneficiary has diabetes mellitus (Refer to the ICD-10 code list in the LCD-related
Policy Article for applicable diagnoses); and,
2. The beneficiary's treating practitioner has concluded that the beneficiary (or beneficiary's
caregiver) has sufficient training using the CGM prescribed as evidenced by providing a
prescription; and,
3. The CGM is prescribed in accordance with its FDA indications for use; and,
4. The beneficiary for whom a CGM is being prescribed, to improve glycemic control, meets at
least one of the criteria below:
A. The beneficiary is insulin-treated; or,
B. The beneficiary has a history of problematic hypoglycemia with documentation of at
least one of the following (see the POLICY SPECIFIC DOCUMENTATION
REQUIREMENTS section of the LCD-related Policy Article (A52464)):
Recurrent (more than one) level 2 hypoglycemic events (glucose <54mg/dL
(3.0mmol/L)) that persist despite multiple (more than one) attempts to adjust
medication(s) and/or modify the diabetes treatment plan; or,
A history of one level 3 hypoglycemic event (glucose <54mg/dL (3.0mmol/L))
characterized by altered mental and/or physical state requiring third-party
assistance for treatment of hypoglycemia
5. Within six (6) months prior to ordering the CGM, the treating practitioner has an in-person
or Medicare-approved telehealth visit with the beneficiary to evaluate their diabetes control
and determined that criteria (1)-(4) above are met.
CGM Continued Coverage
Every six (6) months following the initial prescription of the CGM, the treating practitioner
conducts an in-person or Medicare-approved telehealth visit with the beneficiary to document
adherence to their CGM regimen and diabetes treatment plan.
When a CGM (code E2102 or E2103) is covered, the related supply allowance (code A4238 or
A4239) is also covered. Supplies (code A4238) for an adjunctive CGM integrated into an
external insulin infusion pump are covered when the beneficiary meets both the CGM coverage
criteria and the coverage criteria for an external insulin infusion pump. Refer to the External
Infusion Pumps LCD (L33794) for additional information regarding billing a CGM receiver
incorporated into an insulin infusion pump.
If any of the initial coverage criteria (1)-(5), or the continued coverage criterion are not met, the
CGM and related supply allowance will be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
The supply allowance (code A4238 or A4239) is a monthly allowance that may be billed up to a
maximum of three (3) units of service (UOS) per ninety (90) days at a time. Billing more than
three (3) UOS per ninety (90) days of code A4238 or A4239 will be denied as not reasonable
and necessary. Refer to the CODING GUIDELINES section in the LCD-related Policy Article for
additional billing instructions.
Non-adjunctive CGM devices replace standard home BGMs (HCPCS codes E0607, E2100,
E2101) and related supplies (HCPCS codes A4233, A4234, A4235, A4236, A4244, A4245,
A4246, A4247, A4250, A4253, A4255, A4256, A4257, A4258, A4259). Claims for a BGM and
related supplies, billed in addition to a non-adjunctive CGM device (code E2103) and associated
supply allowance (code A4239), will be denied.
Adjunctive CGM devices do not replace a standard home BGM. The supply allowance for an
adjunctive CGM (A4238) encompasses all items necessary for the use of the device and
includes but is not limited to, CGM sensors and transmitters. Code A4238 does not include a
home BGM and related BGM testing supplies. These items may be billed separately, in addition
to code A4238. Refer to the CODING GUIDELINES section in the LCD-related Policy Article for
additional information.
All CGM devices billed to Medicare using HCPCS code E2103 must be reviewed for correct
coding by the Pricing, Data Analysis and Coding (PDAC) contractor and be listed on the Product
Classification List (PCL). Effective July 1, 2022, all CGMs billed to Medicare using HCPCS code
E2102 must be reviewed for correct coding by the PDAC contractor and be listed on the PCL. If
a CGM system is billed using HCPCS code E2102 or E2103 but the CGM system is not on the
PCL for that particular HCPCS code, then the claim will be denied as incorrect coding. Refer to
the CODING GUIDELINES section in the LCD-related Policy Article for additional information.
GENERAL
A Standard Written Order (SWO) must be communicated to the supplier before a claim is
submitted. If the supplier bills for an item addressed in this policy without first receiving a
completed SWO, the claim shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
For Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetics, Orthotics and Supplies (DMEPOS) base items that
require a Written Order Prior to Delivery (WOPD), the supplier must have received a signed
SWO before the DMEPOS item is delivered to a beneficiary. If a supplier delivers a DMEPOS
item without first receiving a WOPD, the claim shall be denied as not reasonable and
necessary. Refer to the LCD-related Policy Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the
Related Local Coverage Documents section.
For DMEPOS base items that require a WOPD, and also require separately billed associated
options, accessories, and/or supplies, the supplier must have received a WOPD which lists the
base item and which may list all the associated options, accessories, and/or supplies that are
separately billed prior to the delivery of the items. In this scenario, if the supplier separately bills
for associated options, accessories, and/or supplies without first receiving a completed and
signed WOPD of the base item prior to delivery, the claim(s) shall be denied as not reasonable
and necessary.
An item/service is correctly coded when it meets all the coding guidelines listed in CMS HCPCS
guidelines, LCDs, LCD-related Policy Articles, or DME MAC articles. Claims that do not meet
coding guidelines shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary/incorrectly coded.
Proof of delivery (POD) is a Supplier Standard and DMEPOS suppliers are required to maintain
POD documentation in their files. Proof of delivery documentation must be made available to
the Medicare contractor upon request. All services that do not have appropriate proof of
delivery from the supplier shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
REFILL REQUIREMENTS
For DMEPOS items and supplies provided on a recurring basis, billing must be based on
prospective, not retrospective use. For DMEPOS products that are supplied as refills to the
original order, suppliers must contact the beneficiary, and document an affirmative response,
prior to dispensing the refill and not automatically ship on a pre-determined basis, even if
authorized by the beneficiary. This shall be done to ensure that the refilled item remains
reasonable and necessary, existing supplies are expected to end, and to confirm any changes
or modifications to the order. Contact with the beneficiary or designee regarding refills must
take place no sooner than 30 calendar days prior to the expected end of the current supply. For
delivery of refills, the supplier must deliver the DMEPOS product no sooner than 10 calendar
days prior to the expected end of the current supply. This is regardless of which delivery method
is utilized.
For all DMEPOS items that are provided on a recurring basis, suppliers are required to have
contact with the beneficiary or caregiver/designee and document an affirmative response, prior
to dispensing a new supply of items. Suppliers must not deliver refills without a refill request
and an affirmative response from a beneficiary. Items delivered without a valid, documented
refill request will be denied as not reasonable and necessary.
Suppliers must not dispense a quantity of supplies exceeding a beneficiary's expected
utilization. Suppliers must stay attuned to changed or atypical utilization patterns on the part of
their clients. Suppliers must verify with the treating practitioner that any changed or atypical
utilization is warranted.
Regardless of utilization, a supplier must not dispense more than a three (3) month quantity of
BGM testing supplies at a time.
Refill requirements do not apply to code A4238 or A4239. The supply allowance (code A4238
or A4239) is a monthly allowance that may be billed to the DME MACs up to a maximum of
three (3) units of service (UOS) and no more than a ninety (90) day supply may be dispensed to
the beneficiary at a time. Refer to the CODING GUIDELINES section in the LCD-related Policy
Article for additional billing instructions.